# Frequently Asked Questions
## General
### Who are you?
Hey, I'm CryoByte33, or Kyle. I run a [YouTube channel](https://youtube.com/@cryobyte33) that uses my 18 years of Linux 
experience, and experience as a DevOps Engineer for my day job to help people play the games they love on their Decks!

### Will this destroy my Steam Deck?
I haven't heard an instance of this happening, but if something happens **_PLEASE_** open an issue here.

### Does this work on Windows?
Unfortunately, no. Windows doesn't allow tuning things this close to the kernel, with the exception of page file size, 
which is configurable through a GUI inside Windows.

### Do these fixes affect battery life or increase heat generated by the Deck?
No, this doesn't directly affect either the fan speeds or battery life, _but_ it could lift a bottleneck and allow the 
CPU and GPU to work harder, thus raising fan speeds or lowering battery life by technicality.

### Are there any downsides to these fixes?
Not that I'm aware of. At worst, performance breaks even.

### Will updates revert these fixes/settings?
No, but reformatting the Deck will revert it. I tested with several updates and all tweaks were left in place. In the 
event that an update does revert some settings, I will do my best to update the community about it and give you steps 
if necessary.

### What does X setting do?
Please check out my [video on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=od9_a1QQQns) to get an explanation of everything!

## Swap/Swappiness
### What games benefit from the larger swap file?
Any game that uses a combined 16GB for RAM and VRAM will likely benefit from the swap fix in some way. How much the swap 
fix helps will depend on a few factors including asset compression, asset size, and churn of data in memory.

### Do the swap changes work for all games?
Yes, they work for any program on SteamOS loaded from **any** location. That means that even Google Chrome installed on 
an external hard drive would benefit from these changes (If the trigger conditions are met).

### Are there any situations where the swap fix isn't a good option?
No, as long as swappiness is also tuned properly.

### Does the swap fix hurt emulators?
No, even Yuzu and Cemu have benefited from these fixes, and I hope to test more emulators soon.

### Will the swap fix hurt my SSD?
No, using a lower swappiness will completely offset the additional writes from a larger swap file, and actually keep 
the SSD healthier for longer.

### How much SSD wear does the stock configuration cause?
In general, a swappiness of 100 will try to put data into swap prior to RAM. Because of that, a large percentage of all 
memory operations would wear your SSD. I don't have a spare SSD to test this, but I would guess that the default wear 
pattern would reduce the SSD's life to about 4 years of average gameplay on modern games.

Setting the swappiness to 1 won't quite prevent data from making it into swap at all times, but it will reduce the 
frequency to only when the Deck overflows its total memory.

### Do differently-sized SSDs have a performance difference for swapping?
Yes, the read and write speeds both make a difference in the speed of swapping, and therefore performance. That said, 
Valve did a pretty good job at choosing good quality parts with relatively similar speeds so we'd all have a consistent 
experience.

In general, the larger the SSD the faster it is, but there's a lot more to it than that. I plan to test the difference
in speeds as soon as possible.

## Memory Tuning
### What performance differences can I expect from these tweaks?
In general, you'll likely see much smoother gameplay. FPS averages may also be boosted in games where the CPU is the
major bottleneck.

### Is there any risk to applying these settings?
Not as far as I'm aware, since all of these are built into the Linux kernel and I'm just changing pre-existing values
rather than adding or changing functionality.
